My name's Jamie Baker and I'm from the Horn Development Association, HDA, which is a project
in Cardiff that works with local communities and in this case working with Heritage, the
history of black and minority people in Cardiff, focusing on the 1919 race riots, which we
call the Year of Revolt. Hopefully you'll grasp that as we go forward. We're funded
by the Heritage Fund in Wales. Up to now we've developed a number of projects. We've managed
to create databases and we're glad to share those databases where it will advance knowledge
and help people undertaking their own family research. Those databases are number one,
1900 Somalian Yemeni seamen that served on the UK Merchant Navy, 1918 to 21. 50% of those
have pictures. Number two, every Welsh-born or Welsh-based seaman that died in World War
II on the UK Merchant Navy. Three, every Caribbean-born seaman that died on the UK Merchant Navy
in World War II. And number four, every Arab seaman that's from the Gulf of Aden. So Yemeni,
Yemen, Djibouti, Somalia, etc. as we now see them that died on the UK Merchant Navy in World War II.
Now we're going to be undertaking some work which is part of nine months funding from the Heritage
Fund focusing on the race riots in 1919 in Wales. But to understand them we believe you've got to
link them to UK and worldwide events. The project will be number one to try and show the full
context of the events in Wales, UK and worldwide. Two, to train volunteers. This is always central
to what we do. Three, enable local communities to tell their stories about how the families
were affected by the events. Four, tell the story in as available and approachable a way as possible
using podcasts, YouTube channel and People's Collection Wales, Facebook and our own website.
Five, the podcast will be weekly and our hope is that this will enable us to interview people
from all over the world. The intention is to show the global context. And six, never easy,
involve education. Now the race riots in the UK started in January in 1919 in Brumelaw Street,
Glasgow outside the signing on office where Merchant Seaman signed on to get a ship. And in
February it was in South Shields that largely involved Yemeni and Somali Merchant Seaman who
were the victims. In March it was a brief fracas in Salford in England. In April it was East London
where the Chinese were the major victims of the attacks. 5th of June it was Liverpool in England
where we had eight days of attacks against black people by a white mob and all of these riots
were white mobs attacking black and minority people. In Liverpool the most notable and for
many people was the event of Charles Wooden being pursued by a crowd of thousands beaten and thrown
into the River Mersey to drown. 6th of June was when it started in Wales in Newport and then on
the 11th of June it had started in Barry and Cardiff. Now the role of the press in 1919 was
there was no radio that was 1926 it started the BBC or TV the BBC started in 1936 and the press
set their position on what was happening in Wales. The riots in Barry according to the press started
because quote the black way laid him Fred Longman seized him by the throat pinned him against the
wall and stabbed him under the heart. In Newport the riots started because quote a coloured man
accosted a white woman and a soldier intervened. The Cardiff riots were said to have started
because quote blacks in a superior number set upon a lone white man unquote. So the tone was set
blacks are the aggressors and the child's game of whispers begins to be followed by exaggeration.
Now a constant theme during this period and previously and also right up until the middle
of the period after the Second World War was sex and protection of the white race was always
part of the mob's chance and justification during 1919. This is a quote from the chief constable of
Cardiff at the time which may say much more about him than it does about the actual context but
nonetheless white flannels are more revealing than corduroys and make black men more attractive to
white girls, Cardiff girls, who should not be allowed to admire such beasts. This was the
sight of black men playing cricket in a church league. However there was nothing light-hearted
about the quotes that were also in the press. The chief constable again, the coloured seamen who live
in our midst are not imbued with our moral code and have not assimilated our conventions. They
come into contact with the female sex of the white race and their progeny are half-caste with
the vicious hereditary taint of their parents. A theme picked up by the western male newspaper.
The sex problem, black men with white women, which obtrudes upon the matter is one with which the
legislative is unlikely to interfere. Such consorting is ill-assorting. It exhibits either
a depravity or a squalid infatuation. It is repugnant to our finer instincts in which pride of race
occupies a just and inevitable place. The only answer at the time from the British government
of Prime Minister David Lloyd George and his minister Winston Churchill was repatriation of
the black and other races back to their countries of origin and they offered them, the repatriates,
two to five pound plus five pound when they landed back home. However, according to those who were
repatriated and sailed on the SS Orca, they never received the money. An estimated three thousand
were repatriated from the UK, including 200 from Cardiff who were put on a boat in Plymouth.
According to some writers and academics, the riots were caused by unemployment and poverty.
Well, that may be so in their eyes, but how does that explain the over-brutalization of white women
who were stripped and beaten by the mob if it was discovered they were in any kind of relationship
with a black man? The lies published by the press. The fact that the reason the number of
black and minority people had increased in Cardiff, etc. was because Britain had asked them to come
as they were needed during the war. The only solution offered, as I said, was repatriation.
Brutal events across the world that year cannot be explained by unemployment and poverty,
such as the Amritsar massacre in the Punjab in India, legislation to stop freedom of expression
in India and the wave of 37 riots, racial attacks and lynchings being part of them, across America
known as the Red Summer. But in a state of political unrest nationally in the UK,
what happened in places where there were no black or other minorities to blame? Well,
there was still violence and politicians were blamed. For example, Luton Town Hall was burnt
down in July 1919. Let's move forward very briefly. Can it happen again? First, there is a need for
ammunition, then the confidence that, quote, you are on the side of the right, and then there is
the mob. Well, the UK has had a referendum to decide whether it would be part of the European
Union or it would be totally independent. And the newspaper headlines that, as we considered whether
to leave Europe, well, some of those have been the subject of press complaints investigations.
And since 2015-16, when these press were covering and encouraging people to leave Europe,
there has been a 10% increase in racial discrimination, according to surveys,
and a significant rise in all types of hate crime, from attacks on disabled people through to
attacks on lesbian, gay and trans people. Just to quote some headlines,
The Sun, November 2015, one in five British Muslims have sympathy for jihadis.
The Daily Express, July 2016, migrant crisis, sort it now, new home secretary urged to get grip
on borders. The Daily Star, Sunday, 4th of September 2016, one of the most infamous murderers
in Britain's history, the Yorkshire Ripper, Sutcliffe, his surname was, was mentioned.
Yorkshire Ripper turns to Islam. Muslims protect Sutcliffe in jail. The Daily Express, 3rd of August
2016, EU's migrant crisis is colossal. The Express website, 23rd of May 2016, the National Health
Service will be 10 billion in the red in three years time, creaking under weight of migrants.
Daily Express, 16th of May 2016, soaring cost of teaching migrant children, £3 billion bill,
another reason to quit EU. The Daily Express, 12th of November 2015, 75% of new jobs go to EU
migrants in one year. Mail online, report shows the NHS is nearly at breaking point as massive
influx of EU migrants forces doctors to take on 1.5 million extra patients in just three years
and migrants spark housing crisis. Now many of those comments were investigated by the
Press Complaints Authority and some were found to be based upon no facts at all and some were
found to be based upon facts that actually didn't say what the paper said. Retractions in the British
press are never made on the front page so page seven, page eight, etc you would see an apology
some time later. Now one of the questions we've been asked is why does forgotten
history need to be told? This is a quote from Martin Nymuller that I was taught when I was a child.
First they came for the communists and I didn't speak out because I wasn't a communist.
Then they came for the trade unionists and I didn't speak out because I wasn't a trade unionist.
And then they came for the Jews and I didn't speak out because I wasn't a Jew.
And then they came for me and there was no one left to speak out for me,
Pastor Martin Nymuller. And as Edmund Burke said, those who don't know history are destined to
repeat it. Now many stories are forgotten by history and ignored in our classrooms. Hopefully
by telling this story in more detail over eight or nine months we can show the global picture of
the First World War and the allies fear of revolution. How that affected non-white people
globally and how that affected Wales. It is important to understand fear of communism
and Bolshevik uprising and the trade unions and for the first time a potential global perspective
amongst ordinary people, particularly those who were working people and soldiers, merchant navy,
etc. who were returning from war was a common concern across all of the democratic nations.
My name is Jamie Baker. I represent HDA Cardiff and this was recorded in June 2019,
which is the anniversary month of the riots in Wales. We will follow this with a number of
related stories which will be more detailed about individual events and individual places.
Hopefully you'll contact us if there is a part of this story you can contribute to. Thank you.